---
title: Obstacles
category: Ramblings
tags: [socioeconomic factors]
date: 09-09-2010

---

Currently I work from home. This is still challenging as I will have symptoms that cause me to suddenly lose my ability to function at all. Usually once one attack hits, I feel incredibly sick for a while and it either slowly gets better or I keep getting more attacks. I tried to ask my job if I could be off the phones but the background tasks are often too challenging also.     
I don't get a full days work in much anymore. I get told I need to find work but I usually can't do most of it so I spend time looking and not getting paid until I find something. Even recently had someone call me lazy when I was in the middle of throwing up/barely conscious which caused me to pull back even more. It's honestly so defeating.        

I wish I had a good answer on how to change my situation without there being a huge risk of setting myself up for poverty and homelessness.  



* **Financial** -  I'm already pushing myself until I collapse and still poor. Imagine starting another job when you're already prone to missing 3 or more days a month minimum. You usually have to have good standing for a while before benefits are attainable like fmla. Highly prone to getting fired in the first year when you mess up like that.   

* **Medical Costs** - I have high premiums high deductible and the price increases every year with age. There's also very little coverage on visits, surgeries, tests, procedures. I tried to see if there were better options on the marketplace but it shows it will only match my employer. I think there's a community health center here but their doctors don't like patients like me because I'm not an easy case.   
     
* **Little Medical Support** - I haven't had very solid proof. Clinically they've caught some things like nystagmus, low blood pressure, but that's not really enough to convince anyone. Therefore I have little support from Drs. They typically look down on my diagnoses anyways. Even had one recently note that I was faking so that won't look good if I ever need to exchange records for assistance. 
I also lost most of my connections. It's a common thing to become isolated when sick. Especially if all you can manage is work and rest. 
 
* **Transportation** Due to the nature of my issue, travel of any sort is incredibly difficult. I can't drive anymore and just being a passenger can leave me sick for days. It's like motion sickness x100 with fainting, delerious with symptoms, etc. I also have to ask someone to take me to other cities and that means we both need to request PTO for that day since specialists aren't exactly "come in when it's convenient for you". They also can cancel on you at any time. This city is somewhat limited on medical resources. No independent labs so I can't just telehealth and get what's recommended. Very few or no specialized doctors or clinics for certain things like autonomic issues.  

* **Stubbornness** This one I should probably work on but it's really difficult to beg for help and be a burden on others. Asking for help leaves you open for others to criticize you. Call you lazy, a beggar, leech, etc. It's also hard for me to maintain friendships. Imagine always causing a scene, especially if it's someone's big day. Many get so frustrated with you over it and think you can somehow control it, some think you are attention seeking. I'd rather just die tbh. 





