---
title: Misc Studies
category: Studies
tags: [studies]
date: 15-09-2023

---



https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9501247/ Increase in the cerebrospinal fluid content of neurosteroids in patients with unipolar major depression who are receiving fluoxetine or fluvoxamine We recently reported that fluoxetine or paroxetine, two selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), when administered to rats, increase the brain content of the neurosteroid 3alpha-hydroxy-5alpha-pregnane-20-one (3alpha5alpha-ALLO) without altering the brain content of other neurosteroids. ALLO (3alpha5alpha and 3alpha5beta isomers) binds with high affinity to various gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor A subtypes and facilitates the action of GABA at these receptors. We hypothesized that the increase of ALLO brain content induced by treatment with SSRIs could contribute to alleviating the anxiety and dysphoria associated with the symptomatology of major unipolar depression. We measured ALLO content in four cisternal-lumbar fractions of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) before and 8-10 weeks after treatment with fluoxetine or fluvoxamine in 15 patients with unipolar major depression. The concentration of ALLO ( approximately 40 fmol/ml in each CSF fraction of three control subjects) was about 60% lower in patients with major unipolar depression. However, in the same patients, fluoxetine or fluvoxamine treatment normalized the CSF ALLO content. Moreover, a statistically significant correlation (r = 0.58; P < 0.023; n = 15) existed between symptomatology improvement (Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression scores) and the increase in CSF ALLO after fluoxetine or fluvoxamine treatment. [...] The normalization of CSF ALLO content in depressed patients appears to be sufficient to mediate the anxiolytic and antidysphoric actions of fluoxetine or fluvoxamine via its positive allosteric modulation of GABA type A receptors.





https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/7610857/ Role of glucocorticoid in vestibular compensation in relation to activation of vestibular nucleus neurons It is still not established whether or not glucocorticoids are effective in the treatment of vestibular disorders such as dizziness and imbalance, although these drugs in combination with several others are used to treat dizziness and imbalance in some diseases. This study was undertaken to investigate the effects of a glucocorticoid, dexamethasone, on vestibular disorder following unilateral labyrinthectomy in pigmented rabbits. Neuronal activities of the medial vestibular nucleus (MVN) in alpha-chloralose-anesthetized cats were also investigated. Systemic injection of dexamethasone decreased the frequency of nystagmus and head deviation dose-dependently following hemilabyrinthectomy, and the rate of decrease was faster than that obtained by saline. In contrast, RU38486 (a glucocorticoid receptor antagonist) delayed the reduction of nystagmus and head deviation. Micro-iontophoretic application of dexamethasone rapidly enhanced the spontaneous firing of MVN neurons in a dose-dependent manner. These increases were blocked by RU38486, but not by GDEE (a glutamate receptor antagonist) or Co2+ (a Ca2+ channel blocker). These results suggest that dexamethasone directly activates the MVN neurons, thereby accelerating vestibular compensation.

----------

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30721178/ [The influence of corticosteroids on the frequency of vestibular crises] [...] the adrenal glands in the patients suffering from Menière's disease in its different clinical forms. We examined a total of 26 patients at the age from 29 to 47 years presenting with this condition. All the patients were divided into two groups depending on the character of the disease. Group 1 was comprised of 20 patients experiencing the crises from 2 to 6 times during a year. Group 2 was composed of six patients in whom the crises occurred with a frequency of 2-4 times per week within at least two weeks. The serum levels of cortisol and aldosterone were measured both during the crises and between them with the use of the proper immunoenzyme assays. The control group was formed of 20 practically healthy volunteers. It was shown that the blood cortisol level during a fit of dizziness in the patients of group 1 increased in comparison with that in the control subjects (798.7±71.2 nmol/l and 453.68±49.39 nmol/l respectively; p<0.05). The patients having recurrent crises (group 2) experienced a significant decrease in the blood cortisol levels down to 293.5±38.1 nmol/l during a crisis in comparison with the control subjects (453.68±49.39 nmol/l; p<0.05). During the inter-crisis periods , the blood cortisol level in the patients of the first group remained within normal bounds whereas in the patients of the second group its mean value was 18.7% lower (p>0.05). The serum aldosterone level in the patients of the first group was not significantly different from that in the second group both during crises and in the periods of remission. It is concluded that the results of the study provide the data for the pathogenetic substantiation of the possibility for the use of corticosteroids in the treatment of the patients suffering from frequent crisis of Menière's disease.

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30856424/ Attenuated cortisol reactivity to psychosocial stress is associated with greater visual dependency in postural control Despite known anatomical links between the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the vestibular system, there are no studies on the relationship between postural control and HPA axis function. Visual dependence in postural control, often measured by increased postural sway on exposure to visual motion, is an indication of altered visual-vestibular integration with greater weighting towards visual cues for balance. Visual dependence is more common in older age and a range of vestibular and non-vestibular health conditions. The relationship between visual dependence in postural control was investigated in relation to cortisol reactivity to psychosocial stress (using the Trier Social Stress Test for groups: TSST-G), as an index of HPA axis function, in healthy young females. In those who exhibited a cortisol response (>2 nmol/l), a negative relationship between stress-induced cortisol reactivity and visual dependence in postural control was observed, since those with the largest cortisol response showed less visual motion induced postural sway (measured by force platform). This finding in healthy females indicates that subtle non-clinical differences in vestibular function are associated with dysregulated HPA axis activity as indicated by lower cortisol reactivity to psychosocial stress. It adds to the growing body of evidence linking blunted cortisol reactivity to stress to poor homeostatic regulation and potential negative health and behavioural outcomes.



---------



https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3406321/ Interactions between Stress and Vestibular Compensation – A Review Elevated levels of stress and anxiety often accompany vestibular dysfunction, while conversely complaints of dizziness and loss of balance are common in patients with panic and other anxiety disorders. The interactions between stress and vestibular function have been investigated both in animal models and in clinical studies. Evidence from animal studies indicates that vestibular symptoms are effective in activating the stress axis, and that the acute stress response is important in promoting compensatory synaptic and neuronal plasticity in the vestibular system and cerebellum. The role of stress in human vestibular disorders is complex, and definitive evidence is lacking. This article reviews the evidence from animal and clinical studies with a focus on the effects of stress on the central vestibular pathways and their role in the pathogenesis and management of human vestibular disorders.

While inner ear lesions often lead to vestibular and auditory deficits in parallel, the extent to which lesions in one system contribute to functional loss and adaptation in the other is at present largely unknown. For example, auditory cues are known to contribute to spatial orientation and balance function in sighted as well as congenitally blind people (Easton et al., 1998; Dozza et al., 2007), and thus auditory loss may be

om animal studies has demonstrated neural pathways linking the vestibular nuclei with the limbic system including the hypothalamus and that stress responses evoked by vestibular symptoms promote synaptic and neuronal plasticity in the vestibular system. However in man conclusive evidence relating to the interactions between stress and vestibular system plasticity is lacking. In patients who remain poorly compensated following vestibular damage, clinical evidence implicates stress both as a causative agent and as a compounding factor that impedes compensation. In parallel the use of steroids in the treatment of acute vestibular symptoms also indicates a role for the acute stress response in facilitating vestibular compensation. Factors that tend to constrain a fuller understanding of the effects of stress in human vestibular disease include sometimes nebulous clinical definitions, difficult to measure endpoints whether clinical or physiological, and variations in the stress response between individuals and within the same individual over time. Nevertheless, the effects of stress on vestibular function and compensation

Stress axis activation facilitates vestibular compensation In the frog, hypophysectomy delays compensation after UVL while ACTH (4–10) administered post-UVL restores it (Flohr and Luneburg, 1982). In the squirrel monkey ACTH (4–10) given daily post-UVL (Igarashi et al., 1985) and following a two – staged bilateral vestibular labyrinthectomy (Ishii and Igarashi, 1987) was found to improve vestibular compensation. In the guinea pig administration of methylprednisolone (Jerram et al., 1995) and ACTH (4–10; Gilchrist et al., 1990) after UVL were found to improve vestibular compensation while dexamethasone had no effect (Alice et al., 1998). The synthetic ACTH (4–9) fragment (Org 2766) was also shown to improve vestibular compensation following UVL when administered peripherally (Gilchrist et al., 1994) or directly into the MVN (Gilchrist et al., 1996). In the rabbit vestibular compensation improved with dexamethasone administration in a dose-dependent manner, and was delayed following administration of the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) antagonist RU38486 (Yamanaka et al., 1995b). In the rat RU38486 prevented the increase in intrinsic electrophysiological excitability that takes place in ipsi-lesional MVN neurons after UVL, while dexamethasone administration restored it (Cameron and Dutia, 1999; Johnston et al., 2002). The effects of dexamethasone were observed when it was micro-injected into the ipsi-lesional cerebellar flocculus, indicating that the cerebellum is one site of action for GR activation (Johnston et al., 2002). Excessive stress can impair compensation

In addition, neurosteroids can significantly modulate GABAergic and glutamatergic neurotransmission in the MVN. Pregnanolone sulfate and DHEAS reduce GABA receptor efficacy and thus enhance neuronal activity (Yamamoto et al., 1998a,b), while 20-hydroxyecdysone increases GABA activity thus inhibiting neuronal excitability (Okada et al., 1998). Pregnanolone sulfate modulates glutamate receptors and increases MVN neuron activity (Yamamoto et al., 1998b). Tetrahydrodeoxycorticosterone and allopregnanolone also modulate MVN neuronal activity by their actions on GABA and AMPA/kainate receptors (Grassi et al., 2007), while 17 β-estradiol modulates MVN activity by increasing excitatory glutamatergic transmission and reducing GABAergic transmission (Grassi et al., 2009a,b, 2010). These various effects represent a potent and hitherto largely uncharacterized mechanism that regulates the function of the vestibular neural networks. These modulatory effects are likely to be important both in the normal state with basal levels of circulating stress hormones, and the stressed state with elevated levels of stress hormones. In addition, such endocrine modulatory control may mediate the effects of estrogens in menstruating women and potentially explain the increasingly apparent links between the menstrual cycle and the susceptibility to motion sickness, dizziness, and migrainous vertigo (Grassi et al., 2009a).

Stress and Vestibular Compensation in Man Dagilas et al. (2005) investigated the stress response evoked by vestibular stimulation in healthy volunteers by measuring serum cortisol levels at the point of maximal nystagmus while undergoing caloric stimulation. Cortisol levels were found to be significantly elevated above resting levels, while the serum concentrations of glutamate, glycine, and GABA were reduced (Dagilas et al., 2005). In a preceding detailed study, Kohl (1985) demonstrated that cross-angular rotatory vestibular stimulation potently stimulated ACTH, noradrenaline, and adrenaline secretion, in a pattern consistent with a vestibular-evoked stress response. Interestingly while this effect was seen in all subjects, individuals with a low susceptibility to motion sickness had higher baseline levels of ACTH as well as a significantly larger response following rotation (Kohl, 1985). The finding that individual stress response profiles may be correlated with the adaptability to stressful motion stimuli (Kohl, 1985) also suggests that in patients with vestibular lesions, the stress response evoked by vestibular deafferentation may be related to their adaptability to the vestibular symptoms, and could influence the subsequent development of vestibular compensation.

Stress responsiveness and compensation in clinical practice Vestibular stressors may present either in the form of a single acute episode as in vestibular neuritis, a vascular event or surgical deafferentation, or chronic repeated episodes such as in Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo (BPPV), Meniere’s disease, or migrainous vertigo. If the process of vestibular compensation is inadequate, the underlying dysfunction may persist and eventually present as chronic dizziness (Bronstein et al., 2010). Thus the nature of the stress response in individual patients is likely to vary according to the underlying dysfunction, with an acute episode of vertigo in vestibular neuritis that gradually subsides having a different stress response profile compared with the unpredictable episodes in patients with Meniere’s disease or migrainous vertigo, or the chronic dizziness of the poorly compensated patient.

Chronic stress and the poorly compensated patient Horii et al. (2007) reported elevated cortisol levels in dizzy patients with neurootological diagnoses compared with those in a group of patients with idiopathic dizziness, whereas plasma AVP levels were found to be elevated in both groups* (Horii et al., 2007). Takeda et al. (1995) also reported high AVP levels in patients during an acute attack of Meniere’s disease** (Takeda et al., 1995). van Cruijsen et al. (2005) reported significantly elevated serum and salivary cortisol levels in Meniere’s patients compared with healthy controls (van Cruijsen et al., 2005). Horner and Cazals (2005) assessed cortisol and ACTH in patients





-----------



https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7596253/ Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo Risk Factors Unique to Perimenopausal Women Many investigations have found common occurrences of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) in women, and clinical experience has shown that BPPV can develop due to increased hormonal fluctuations, especially during menopause. Therefore, knowledge about neurochemicals and their involvement with BPPV is imperative for the management of neurological issues in women. This review will discuss appropriate gender-based considerations of BPPV based on experimental and clinical evidence. The studies describe 2 lines of evidence regarding the association of perimenopause in women and the development of BPPV: (1) experimental evidence: the existence of estrogen receptors in the inner ear, otoconial malformations in osteopenic/osteoporotic rats, changes in otoconin 90 caused by hormone replacement therapy, and impaired calcium absorption following estrogen deprivation corrected by estrogen replacement therapy and (2) clinical evidence: epidemiological aspects, osteoporosis and estrogen deficiency. Future studies are necessary to validate the effects of hormonal replacement therapy and phytoestrogen in women with recurrent BPPV. Keywords: vertigo, estrogen, women, otoconia, perimenopause

Known as the most common cause of recurrent vertigo (1), benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is an important health problem affecting more than 420 million adults worldwide, based on an international consensus that BPPV has a lifetime prevalence of 10% (2). BPPV increases with age, especially during menopause, in a ratio of 2-3.2:1 for women and men aged 40–60 years (3–8). In particular, hormonal changes, external estrogens, and pregnancy exposure are only experienced by women. Further understanding of possible contributors to the predominance of BPPV in women could make a significant contribution to our understanding of the causes of BPPV and may provide new methods for prevention. Therefore, the present study will review the current state of knowledge on BPPV risk factors specific to women.

Perimenopause Period There are three stages of perimenopause in the executive summary of the Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop: “early menopausal transition (early perimenopause), characterized by irregularities in the menstrual cycle, late menopausal transition (late perimenopause), characterized by an interval of more than 60 days of amenorrhea in the previous 12 months; and early postmenopause, which is the first year following the last menstrual period (9).” Physiologically, estrogen declines sharply during this period, which occurs over several years and is characterized by marked fluctuations in sex hormone levels. The fluctuations during this period are more severe than those during the menstrual cycle (10). Regarding personal aspects, menopause occurs during the time in life when women are actively involved in raising a family and/or full-time work, during which time women may also be responsible for caring for elderly parents. Most menopausal women experience uncomfortable symptoms, and menopause is related to an increased risk for metabolic syndrome, in addition to obesity and osteoporosis (11). In the field of gynecology, menopausal symptoms are assessed using the “Kupperman rating scale” (Table 1) (12–14). The inclusion of vertigo items in one menopausal symptom index suggests that vertigo is also a frequent complaint in gynecology clinics. Although the nature of vertigo has not been precisely elucidated, postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy (HRT) was superior to placebo when assessed by the “Kupperman scale including the item addressing vertigo (15).” Additionally, many neurotology studies have shown an increased incidence of BPPV in women, and experience with older people suggests that hormonal fluctuations, particularly during menopause, may increase, resulting in the development of BPPV (3–8). Cooperative management between neurotologists and gynecologists could be helpful in the management of dizziness in women who experience

Experimental Evidence Anatomical Differences Differences in the peripheral vestibular system between men and women have been reported. To our knowledge, no reports have described the direct comparison of otoconial morphology between women and men. However, in the anteroposterior dimension, the width of the peripheral vestibular system is significantly smaller in women (16), which could suggest a difference in otoconial morphology, such as differences in the bones according to sex. Further validation studies are needed. Hormone Changes Physiologically, testosterone levels are more stable than estrogen levels throughout a woman's life and are relatively constant at ages 30–70 (17). Estrogen decreases steeply during the climacteric period. The female sex hormone estrogen 17β-estradiol (E2) is well-known to perform many tasks and contributes to various roles, such as reproductive organ differentiation and function, memory processes and bone metabolism (18, 19). Clinically, E2 and progesterone levels are clearly reduced in women with BPPV (20, 21); however, no difference in testosterone was found between the postmenopausal and control groups (21). Similar to other sex steroids, estrogen acts on target cells by attaching to nuclear hormone receptors such as estrogen receptor (ER)α and β (22). Thus, the ER level is an important determinant that influences estrogen signaling to the cell.

Estrogen and Vitamin D Recent reports have shown that reduced serum levels of vitamin D are associated with the occurrence of BPPV (4, 35–40), and supplementation of vitamin D with/without calcium reduces recurrent events in BPPV patients (41–44). Estrogen treatment prevents the loss of intestinal Ca2+ absorption and bone density caused by ovariectomy in the premenopausal period (45). Experimental studies have shown that impaired Ca2+ absorption following estrogen deprivation is caused by a decreased response to 1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol, the main regulator of intestinal absorption, and that estrogen treatment, rather than short-term replacement with 1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol, can amend this abnormality. Therefore, combined hormone replacement and vitamin D management could be more effective for the prevention of further attacks of vertigo in perimenopausal women with BPPV. However, further validation studies are needed (45). Clinical Evidence Susceptibility of Women to BPPV Several factors increase the susceptibility to BPPV, including older age, head and neck trauma, inactivity, and other ear problems or surgery. Many studies have shown a common occurrence in women, and clinical experience with older people has shown that BPPV can develop due to increased hormonal fluctuations, especially during menopause (3–8). BPPV and Oral Contraceptives A previous study reported that recurrent BPPV was related to oral contraceptives (46). It has been postulated that oral contraceptives may induce disturbances in the water and electrolyte balance, variances in endolymph pH and abnormalities in carbohydrate or lipid metabolism, which may cause otoconial degeneration and subsequent otoconial detachment and BPPV (46).

Hormone Replacement Therapy HRT to combat estrogen depletion in menopause has also been successfully used to treat vasomotor symptoms and is assumed to be neuroprotective compared to women not using HRT. Although the nature of vertigo has not been precisely elucidated, women using postmenopausal HRT had better scores than the placebo group on the “Kupperman scale” (sweating, hot flashes, myalgia, and vertigo) (15). The hormonal fluctuation of ovarian neurosteroids might trigger the occurrence/recurrence of BPPV during the perimenopausal period. In the Taiwanese population, a study revealed that the incidence of BPPV was significantly lower in patients taking estrogen for menopausal syndrome in two age groups (ages 45–65 and ages 65 and over) (6). These findings support the efficacy of estrogen supplementation to decrease the occurrence of BPPV in women with menopause. The possible mechanisms include complete, more reliable estrogen blood levels that induce protective effects, estrogen effects on autophagy and possible epigenetic modulation (5, 6, 20, 63). However, chronic use of HRT increases the risk of breast cancer (64), stroke (64), and venous thrombosis. Therefore, many postmenopausal women rely on other non-steroidal estrogen mimetics or natural remedies to solve the problems associated with the symptoms of estrogen deficiency. Phytoestrogen could be an alternative to HRT. Phytoestrogens, including soy isoflavones, are non-steroidal, diphenolic substances that can bind to ERs and have activity similar to that of estrogen (65). To date, there have been no reports on the effectiveness of phytoestrogens on BPPV recurrence.

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28480516/ Estradiol deficiency is a risk factor for idiopathic benign paroxysmal positional vertigo in postmenopausal female patients Objectives/hypothesis: Although it is generally considered that benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is associated with changes in female sex hormone levels, no direct data have been reported until now. The purpose of this article was to provide direct data showing the distinct relationship between female sex hormone fluctuations and BPPV in postmenopausal female patients. Study design: Prospective analysis in humans and basic research in animals. Methods: Blood samples were analyzed to determine the levels of estradiol, progesterone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and luteinizing hormone in 50- to 80-year-old postmenopausal female patients newly diagnosed with idiopathic BPPV based on history compatible with BPPV and positive provocative maneuvers. Animal models of bilateral ovariectomy and female sex hormone replacement therapy were used to further confirm the relationship between BPPV and female sex hormone levels by determining the expression levels of otoconin 90, the protein suggested as essential in the dislocation of otoconia. Results: Statistically significant differences between the estradiol level of BPPV patients and the control group were found (P < .001). Moreover, in bilateral ovariectomy in rats, 17β-estradiol replacement reversed the decrease of otoconin 90 levels. Conclusions: Our results suggest that estradiol deficiency may be an important risk factor for idiopathic benign paroxysmal positional vertigo in postmenopausal female patients.

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35398289/ Serum estradiol correlates with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo in postmenopausal women Results: 86 postmenopausal women with BPPV and 80 age- and demographics and clinical characteristics-matched normal postmenopausal women were enrolled. Decreased E2, increased otolin-1, and decreased BMD were observed in postmenopausal women with BPPV, and increased BMD and decreased otolin-1 could be observed in higher serum E2 patients. ROC analysis revealed that E2, otolin-1, and BMD showed low sensitivity and moderate specificity to discriminate the occurrence of BPPV. On the other hand, low correlation coefficient was found between E2 and otolin-1, or BMD. It was worth noting that low E2 level was found in the relapse BPPV patients after a one-year follow-up. Conclusion: E2 deficiency is correlated with the occurrence of BPPV, which may be a potential risk biomarker for postmenopausal women.

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20443014/ Effects of estradiol-drospirenone hormone treatment on carotid artery intima-media thickness and vertigo/dizziness in postmenopausal women Abstract Aim: To investigate the effects of Angeliq on hormonal, metabolic, biochemical and cardiovascular profile, carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT) and vertigo/dizziness symptoms in postmenopausal women. Methods: Angeliq is a drug used for hormone replacement therapy that composed of drospirenone 2 mg and estradiol 1 mg. Thirty-two postmenopausal women were recruited for the study. All women were evaluated using personal interview, medical examination and carotid artery ultrasound. They were questioned specifically about vertigo/dizziness experienced. Participants were randomly submitted to oral daily treatment with Angeliq. The duration of the study was 6 months and the participants were studied in basal condition and after 6 months of the therapy. Results: Follicle-stimulating hormone was significantly higher and estradiol was significantly lower in before therapy (BT) than in after therapy (AT) (p < 0.001). No differences in fasting glucose, CRP and WBC values, and lipid-lipoprotein profile were detected between the groups. The systolic and diastolic blood pressures and heart rate were also significantly higher in BT than in AT (p < 0.05). A significant (p < 0.001) difference in CIMT (0.51 ± 0.04 vs. 0.49 ± 0.03 mm) was found between BT and AT. Seven of 32 patients (22%) had vertigo/dizziness symptoms before treatment. After 6 months, none of the patients showed complaints of vertigo/dizziness. Conclusions: Oral daily treatment with Angeliq reduces CIMT and climacteric complaints including vertigo/dizziness in postmenopausal women. They may relate to anti-androgenic and anti-mineralocorticoid effects of Angeliq, respectively.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6430344/ 2019 Correlation between auditory‐vestibular functions and estrogen levels in postmenopausal patients with Meniere's disease Results A total of 76 postmenopausal patients with MD and 50 healthy postmenopausal controls were included. The patients with MD had lower estrogen levels (22.50 ± 16.66 pg/mL vs 30.69 ± 18.59 pg/mL, P = 0.011), longer I‐V interpeak latency of ABR (left 0.22 ± 0.16 mseconds vs 0.18 ± 0.10 mseconds, P = 0.118; right 0.24 ± 0.13 mseconds vs 0.17 ± 0.09 mseconds, P = 0.001), and higher unilateral weakness (UW) value (P < 0.001) in comparison with the controls. The mean pure‐tone thresholds of at the speech frequency (500 Hz, 1 kHz, 2 kHz, and 3 kHz) were significantly elevated in patients with MD than those in the controls (left P < 0.001, right P < 0.01). The estradiol level of patients with MD was correlated with ABR latency (left r = −0.229, P < 0.05; right r = −0.220, P < 0.05) and UW value (r = −0.328, P < 0.05), but not with mean pure‐tone threshold. Conclusions Estrogen levels correlated with auditory and vestibular function in postmenopausal patients with MD. Low estrogen may be involved in the microcirculatory disturbance of the inner ear, affecting the occurrence and development of MD.





-------------



https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34024170/ Clinical significance of serum sex hormones in postmenopausal women with vestibular migraine: potential role of estradiol Results: Serum levels of estradiol, progesterone, and testosterone were significantly lower, while serum prolactin levels were significantly higher in postmenopausal patients with vestibular migraine compared with healthy controls. Serum estradiol levels were negatively correlated with the duration, frequency, and severity of onset of vestibular migraine. Patients with higher serum estradiol levels showed a longer disease-free survival time. Conclusion: Sex hormones are correlated with vestibular migraine in postmenopausal women. Additionally, estradiol levels are correlated with the duration, frequency, and severity of onset of vestibular migraine, as well as the disease-free survival time.

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28534686/ 2017 HASHIMOTO THYROIDITIS AND VESTIBULAR DYSFUNCTION Objective: The aim of this review was to analyze the existing literature concerning the relationship between Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT) and vestibular dysfunction. Methods: We used electronic databases (PubMed, EMBASE, Cochrane Library) to search and collect all published articles about the association between HT and vestibular disorders. Results: Several observational and retrospective studies have postulated a relationship between thyroid autoimmunity and vestibular disorders. In most cases, an appropriate control group was lacking, and the impact of thyroid functional status could not precisely be established. In recent years, two well-designed prospective studies have provided convincing evidence that the association is not random. One article reported that patients with Ménière disease (MD) had a significantly higher prevalence of positive anti-thyroid autoantibody as compared to healthy controls. Moreover, more than half of MD patients had either positive anti-thyroid or non-organ-specific autoantibody titers, compared to less than 30% of both patients with unilateral vestibular paresis without cochlear involvement and healthy controls. Another study found that patients with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) had significantly higher serum thyroid-stimulating hormone and antithyroid autoantibody levels than healthy controls. Additionally, almost one-fifth of euthyroid patients with HT had signs of BPPV. Conclusion: The published results indicate that patients with MD or BPPV are potential candidates to also develop HT. Thus, in HT patients, the presence of even slight symptoms or signs potentially related to vestibular lesions should be carefully investigated.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4948427/ Incidence of Hypothyroidism in Meniere’s Disease Materials and Methods The study was carried out on total 35 out patients who were clinically diagnosed of Meniere’s disease and of these 35 patients, 12 patients were found to have hypothyroidism. All patients with hypothyroidism were treated with oral thyroxin supplements and they were evaluated clinically at 3 weeks, 3 months and 6 months interval for the improvement in subjective symptoms on outpatient basis. Results In our study, the subjective improvement of all symptoms was seen in all cases of Meniere’s disease with hypothyroidism after 12 weeks of treatment. Conclusion The improvement in clinical symptoms after treatment demonstrates an association between Meniere’s disease and hypothyroidism which was found to be significant. Hence, clinicians should consider screening patients with Meniere disease for thyroid dysfunction who are not already taking supplements.

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23906822/ Vertigo and metabolic disorders Material and method: The study evaluates the metabolic profile of 325 patients with vertigo who sought the Otolaryngology Department of the University of São Paulo in the Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade de São Paulo. The laboratory tests ordered according to the classical research protocol were: low-density lipoprotein cholesterol fraction, TSH, T3, T4 and fasting blood sugar level. The metabolic disorders found and the ones that were observed in the general population were compared. The high level of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, the altered levels of thyroid hormones, the higher prevalence of diabetes mellitus were the most significant changes found in the group of study.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5733003/ The Role of Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 in the Progression of Age-Related Hearing Loss Aging is associated with impairment of sensorial functions and with the onset of neurodegenerative diseases. As pari passu circulating insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) bioavailability progressively decreases, we see a direct correlation with sensory impairment and cognitive performance in older humans. Age-related sensory loss is typically caused by the irreversible death of highly differentiated neurons and sensory receptor cells. Among sensory deficits, age-related hearing loss (ARHL), also named presbycusis, affects one third of the population over 65 years of age and is a major factor in the progression of cognitive problems in the elderly. The genetic and molecular bases of ARHL are largely unknown and only a few genes related to susceptibility to oxidative stress, excitotoxicity, and cell death have been identified. IGF-1 is known to be a neuroprotective agent that maintains cellular metabolism, activates growth, proliferation and differentiation, and limits cell death. Inborn IGF-1 deficiency leads to profound sensorineural hearing loss both in humans and mice. IGF-1 haploinsufficiency has also been shown to correlate with ARHL. There is not much information available on the effect of IGF-1 deficiency on other human sensory systems, but experimental models show a long-term impact on the retina. A secondary action of IGF-1 is the control of oxidative stress and inflammation, thus helping to resolve damage situations, acute or made chronic by aging. Here we will review the primary actions of IGF-1 in the auditory system and the underlying molecular mechanisms. [...]Regarding the aforementioned mechanisms, IGF-1 is a neurotrophic factor with anti-inflammatory actions. It is anti-apoptotic and favors cell renewal.

In this context, IGF-1 emerges as a potential protector of the inner ear. Studies in animal models have shown that local application of recombinant human IGF-1 (rhIGF-I) protects the cochlea from functional and histologic losses induced by aminoglycoside ototoxicity and noise exposure (Iwai et al., 2006; Yamahara et al., 2015). IGF-1 rescued hair cells from apoptosis by downregulating pro-apoptotic gene expression and regulating glucose transporters (Yamahara et al., 2015). Similarly, IGF-1 and substance P protect vestibular hair cells against neomycin ototoxicity (Yoshida et al., 2015).

https://ejnpn.springeropen.com/articles/10.1186/s41983-018-0042-y Insulin-Like Growth Factor-1 in Acute Ischemic Stroke Cerebrovascular ischemic stroke is highly prevalent in the general population and is considered one of the frequent causes of mortality and disability. Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) is recognized as an important neuro-protective factor against cerebral vascular ischemic insult. Patients and methods Two hundred patients with AIS (within the first 24 h) were subjected to full neurological examination, assessment of stroke severity using National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) and measurement of serum IGF-1 levels. The control group included 100 subjects matched for age, gender, and conventional vascular risk factors. Results Serum IGF-1 levels were significantly reduced in cases of first AIS compared to control group. A reduced serum IGF-1 level was an independent risk factor for ischemic stroke with cut off value less than 148.3 ng/ml associated with increased AIS risk. Conclusion Lower IGF-1 levels are significantly related to risk of ischemic stroke occurrence, independent from other conventional risk factors in the Egyptian population.

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/17927668/ The relevance of an elevation in the plasma vasopressin levels to the pathogenesis of Meniere's attack An elevation of plasma vasopressin levels has been frequently observed in Meniere's disease patients. However, little is known regarding the mechanism behind this elevation. The plasma vasopressin levels and plasma osmolality were therefore determined in 18 diagnosed Meniere's disease patients and 20 patients with other types of vertigo, who required admission for severe vertigo attacks. All participants were given questionnaires regarding their clinical and psychological status, including their stress levels and depression status, to evaluate environmental stress events. The plasma vasopressin levels of Meniere's disease patients in the acute phase (4.1 +/- 1.37 pg/ml) were significantly higher compared with with those of other vertigo patients in the acute phase (2.1 +/- 0.41 pg/ml) (P < 0.01). The average plasma osmolality of the Meniere's disease group was higher than that of the other vertigo patients group (P < 0.05). No significant difference in reported stress levels, depression status and prevalence of primary headache between the groups was observed. The plasma vasopressin showed no significant correlation with the patients' clinical data (occurrence of emesis or nausea, prevalence of primary headache, depression status and stress). No correlation between the plasma vasopressin and the plasma osmolarity was observed in the Meniere's disease group. These results suggest that the elevation of plasma vasopressin in the acute phase of Meniere's disease is therefore related to the pathogenesis of Meniere's attacks, and the results obtained may provide helpful information for distinguishing between Meniere's disease and other various inner ear diseases.

https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27362705/ 2016 A Two-Year Randomized Trial of Interventions to Decrease Stress Hormone Vasopressin Production in Patients with Meniere's Disease-A Pilot Study Meniere's disease, a common inner ear condition, has an incidence of 15-50 per 100,000. Because mental/physical stress and subsequent increase in the stress hormone vasopressin supposedly trigger Meniere's disease, we set a pilot study to seek new therapeutic interventions, namely management of vasopressin secretion, to treat this disease. We enrolled 297 definite Meniere's patients from 2010 to 2012 in a randomized-controlled and open-label trial, assigning Group-I (control) traditional oral medication, Group-II abundant water intake, Group-III tympanic ventilation tubes and Group-IV sleeping in darkness. Two hundred sixty-three patients completed the planned 2-year-follow-up, which included assessment of vertigo, hearing, plasma vasopressin concentrations and changes in stress/psychological factors. At 2 years, vertigo was completely controlled in 54.3% of patients in Group-I, 81.4% in Group-II, 84.1% in Group-III, and 80.0% in Group-IV (statistically I < II = III = IV). Hearing was improved in 7.1% of patients in Group-I, 35.7% in Group-II, 34.9% in Group-III, and 31.7% in Group-IV (statistically I < II = III = IV). Plasma vasopressin concentrations decreased more in Groups-II, -III, and -IV than in Groups-I (statistically I < II = III = IV), although patients' stress/psychological factors had not changed. Physicians have focused on stress management for Meniere's disease. However, avoidance of stress

is unrealistic for patients who live in demanding social environments. Our findings in this pilot study suggest that interventions to decrease vasopressin secretion by abundant water intake, tympanic ventilation tubes and sleeping in darkness is feasible in treating Meniere's disease, even though these therapies did not alter reported mental/physical stress levels.





--------



Promising drugs: - Piribedil - Fluvoxamine, study on vertigo where improvement is made, potential increase in GABA-A agonism which could be beneficial as per diazepam. - Sodium bicarbonate [tentative], used in Asia - Angeliq, postmenopausal HRT, estradiol and a type of progestin. Tried for a type of vertigo directly, but estradiol seems to be the more important hormone in general for all the disorders. Intravaginal progesterone potentially has fewer side effects than the other/oral progestins. Value of progesterone as a whole uncertain. - GH/IGF-1 protective for inner ear. Leaving that aside, low IGF-1 is a risk factor for stroke, and poor prognosis/recovery. There seems to be a connection between low estradiol/vitamin D/calcium and low density/abnormalities of the otoconia, and an association with low BMD. If this is a solid connection then GH should be useful as well. - Vasopressin interventions as per the MD study - or a V2 antagonist as per https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/26719142/ - relevant only for MD. - Hydrocortisone/prednisone/dexamethasone - Seems important for vestibular compensation. Patients with MD who had only a handful of attacks per year show a robust cortisol response to vertigo. Patients with several attacks per week show a very blunted response. In animal studies, removal of the pituitary gland worsens vestibular compensation but synthetic ACTH administration restores it. A study on rabbits shows a dose dependent improvement with dexamethasone, worsening with GR antagonist. - Treat hypothyroidism if present, very common in vestibular disorders

------------



Amphetamines improve tolerance to stimulation with rotations [163]. The use of amphetamines in combination with scopolamine or antihistaminics increased the antivertiginous effect and reduced the secondary sedation produced by antihistaminics and anticholinergic drugs. Ephedrine seems to be as effective as amphetamines in increasing the effectiveness of drugs used for the control of movement disease, but without the addictive potential of amphetamines. The application of dopamine (0.1-1 mM) and D1 and D2 agonists induced a dose-dependent and reversible decline in the resting discharge frequency of vestibular afferents in the isolated frog vestibule [6]. The responses of afferent neurons to EAA agonists were inhibited by D1 and D2 agonists, implicating both subtypes of dopamine receptors in the modulation of both ionotropic and metabotropic glutamate receptors. The results obtained suggest that dopamine may interact with both D1 and D2 receptor subtypes that are most likely located postsynaptically on the afferent neurons, where they may form part of the efferent control of vestibular input [6]. These findings coincide with those of previous studies that indicate the participation of catecholamines in vestibular neurotransmission [47] and contribute to understanding the mechanism of action of dopaminergic-related drugs, such as droperidol, in the treatment of vestibular disorders. In fact, sulpiride, which is a selective antagonist at postsynaptic D2 receptors, has been used as a “vestibular sedative”."

'The activation of Mu-opioid receptors on afferent neurons potentiates the action of excitatory amino acids, increasing the afferent activity [156]. '

