---
title: Etiology
category: Causes
tags: [causes]
date: 09-09-2011

---

It's hard to identify the causes. At one point I had no issues driving to work, working long hours, being active, socializing, functioning on low sleep, caffeine, then suddenly I started feeling more "off" after a particularly bad infection. Until the day I pushed myself too hard and my body just ... shut down. Did I always have this weakness in me and all of the below were just catalysts?   
Since I wasn't exactly focusing on my health, these events are foggy. 



##  Viral/Bacterial
Maybe at some point in 2009 I got sick. I usually catch something every year so this wasn't alarming for me in any way. I remember this being particularly bad however. I was pissing and coughing up blood. I had no insurance at the time which wasn't uncommon for my specific situation (young 20s, no parents, recession). At some point I went to an urgent care and quick clinic. I do remember being prescribed Cipro, and getting upset I wasn't warned about how intense the symptoms would be. I didn't take my last few doses either. One way or another I recovered but never bounced back to my usual self and had residual symptoms that I brushed off. I tried to obtain my medical records from this time but they said they didn't exist. I later found out that may have been a lie since my dr many many years later confirmed I had been there at that time.  
I think it was a kidney infection and strep together somehow. I don't think I remember or was told what the actual infection was. 
Also strange thing that has happened was a temporary resolution of all symptoms while on azithromycin. 

## Environmental 

I was living in pretty trashy conditions. I didn't care about diseases. I mean,... all of my friends were living this way, some even worse, and they were all fine. There was mold in my apartment. Mouse infestations. Terrible diet choices. I lived on little sleep. This was also a problem for me from birth until about 8yrs old also since my parents struggled with money for a while. 
I had been homeless several times then and briefly past 18. Slept outside multiple times, occasionally in the middle of winter and remember getting quite sick over it.  
Still .. I had started to improve my living conditions and career one step at a time. Especailly after that viral infection that took me down, I realized I needed to step up a bit with my overall health choices. 

Also wonder if the climate of this area has anything to do with it. I've never tried living elsewhere. 

## Genetics

This is all still such a new field. I did end up pulling my raw data from a consumer dna kit into an aggregator that links health similarities of the carriers to certain SNPs. Some of course still just theoretical but many held heavy weight with tons of accredited studies. 

The top confident findings indicated poor drug metabolism. A lot of cardiac issues. Nothing that stuck out as completely suggestive of a predisposed weakness that could have caused this all to happen. 

My family health history was also a mess but nothing too solid genetically. The usual just overall shit genes situation. Cancers, heart disease, diabetes, depression, anxiety, stupidity, etc. 

I seem to be predisposed to hypertension in particular which is curious to me, as I struggle with hypotension. 


## Pyschological

This is an uncomfortable topic of causataion for me and many others. 
And since it's a spectrum that cannot be objectively measured, it leaves a lot to be debated.  
That being said, my family is rife with anxiety, depression, panic attacks, addictions, abuse, etc. And I can certainly attest that I've felt some of these strongly. Especially the panic attacks which in itself can feel worse than most physical problems I've ever had. There was also a lot of abuse present that I've discovered scores a 9 for me on ACE. I realized this long ago before I even became sick. And I didn't want to be a statistic. I had psychology text books as a child in hopes that educating myself to what was happening to me would prevent me from being victimized to these things. After I moved out I never had flashbacks. But the hypervigilance was always there.  
I caught myself making some poor decisions and slowly tried to right my wrongs over time. Hoping that in time, my brain would catch up and be... as close to normal as I could hope for.   
  
But maybe there is just something about the way this all shaped me that ultimately led to my downfall. 
My first therapist mentioned the possibility of my sympathetic nervous sytem being compromised and allowing illnesses that most would brush off to be overwhelming for me. 
I also am convinced this lowers immunity and leaves you more susceptible to actual physical damage to diseases. Damage that we just can't objectively measure yet. 

I also did eventually see a psychologist. He was nice and empathetic but I don't think much was discovered out of the limited sessions I could afford. Overall I was just trying to see if a professional could tease out if I truly am having all of these issues due to a psychological standpoint but he seemed to be convinced mine were physical while my therapist before him was convinced it was psychological. 


































