---
title: Progress and Future attempts
category: Todo_Progress
tags: [progress, ]
date: 02-05-2024

---



As of 5/2/24 I have reduced POTS, PPPD, and IBS. 
<br>
Vertigo attacks are still to date the most intense thing I think I will ever experience. 
Once I was able to quell severe attacks with ativan, I no longer feared them in the same way.   

I also got a head start on things as I had fallen ill with a gastrointestinal illness and I was having issues with it not being eradicated. I was basically barely eating and everything was leaving my system fast... so I loaded on medical grade probiotics. 
This not only fixed my issue but my IBS was gone. Where as I've tried probiotics in the past without this success. I think it had something to do with having such an empty gi tract as a base.  
<br>
I had pathetic attempts in the past of running daily. It would both cause severe stomach pain (to the point of fainting over and over on the floor all night) and increase my vertigo attacks. 
I no longer experience severe pain. And I can escape the panic that vertigo attacks present. 

I still have issues if I pushed myself too hard but I've made it to one mile a day after a year. 

The days I try 5k I must be so careful as I've made myself sick for weeks after. Malaise, anxiety, flu like symptoms, etc. I've also lost consciousness a few times which led to injuries.   

I never seem to improve my pace and it's worse than a beginners level. It often will get worse for weeks then back to basaeline. I try to keep myself in the orange zone for heart rate to avoid a crash and I notice myself never adapting to the higher speeds. I still break out in a significant sweat after half a mile.  


Also Ativan has an unfortunate side effect for me of causing panic/high anxiety the next day. To the point I am quite debilitated. 
I'm not sure why this happens on such a low dose .5 - 1mg when I rarely take it (once a month). But I have heard from one other person with the same vestibular condition that she experiences the same issue.  

As of right now I still deal with:

<li>vertigo attacks
<li>poisoned feeling, malaise?
<li>cramps
<li>odd neuro issues (assuming migraine aura)
<li>fatigue

<br><br>

I still can't drive well if at all. Everytime I have to turn my head sharply, accelerate, sudden movements in an odd way... everything starts to spin which is likely to cause an accident in the middle of traffic. I don't really know how I will ever overcome that one. I try to keep my driving short, infrequent, and in the city.  

I do wish to try to continue testing but feel it's a hassle with our current medical system. I'd like to know if I have:
<br>
-SCDS  
  <br>
-Eagle syndrome

<br><br>
But I have a feeling that there's a higher likelihood of data mistenterpretation/human error than there is of an actual correct workflow of actions from person a through z.  



